# ADAU 1787

> All information presented on this file was extracted from the [ADAU1787's datasheet](https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/adau1787.pdf).

## PROGRAM RAM, PARAMETER RAM, AND DATA RAM

The ADAU1787 address space encompasses a set of registers and three RAMs: program, parameter, and data. Table 20 shows the RAM map. The memory map from the perspective of the SigmaDSP is different than the mapping of the memories to the external control interface because internally within the SigmaDSP each word has its own address, while over the control interface, each byte has its own address. Additionally, the mapping of the memories to the external control interface is offset. The program RAM and parameter RAM are not initialized on power-up and are in an unknown state until the RAMs are written to.

### PROGRAM RAM

The program RAM contains the 39-bit operation codes that are executed by the core. The SigmaStudio compiler calculates the instructions executed per frame for a given program and generates an error when this number exceeds the maximum allowable instructions per frame based on the sample rate of the signals in the core. Because the end of a program contains a jump to start command, the unused program RAM space does not need to be filled with no operation (NOP) commands.

### PARAMETER RAM

The parameter RAM is 28-bits wide and occupies Address 0 (0x0000) to Address 1023 (0x3FFF). The data format of the parameter RAM is twos complement, 5.23, which means that the coefficients can range from +16.0 (minus 1 LSB) to −16.0, with 1.0 represented by the binary word `0000 1000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000` or by the hexadecimal word `0x00 0x80 0x00 0x00`. The parameter RAM can be written to directly or with a safeload write. The direct write mode of operation is typically used during a completely new loading of the RAM using burst mode addressing to avoid any clicks or pops in the outputs. Although this mode can be used during program execution, there is no handshaking between the core and the control port, and the parameter RAM is unavailable to the DSP core during control writes, resulting in pops and clicks in the audio stream.

SigmaStudio automatically assigns the first eight positions to safeload parameters. Therefore, project-specific parameters start at Address `0x0008`. The SDSP_RUN bit (Bit 0, Register `0xC081`) must be set to `0` before writing to the parameter RAM.

### DATA RAM

The ADAU1787 data RAM stores audio data-words for processing, as well as certain run-time parameters. SigmaStudio provides the data and address information for writing to and reading from the data RAM. The ADAU1787 has 2048 words of data RAM available. The SigmaStudio compiler manages the data RAM and indicates whether the number of addresses needed in the design exceeds the maximum number available.

### Table 20. RAM SigmaDSP Internal Map and Read/Write Modes

| Memory        | Size (Words) | Address Range                   | Read | Write | Write Modes              |
|---------------|--------------|---------------------------------|------|-------|--------------------------|
| Parameter RAM | 2048 × 28    | 0 to 2047 (0x0000 to 0x03FF)    | Yes  | Yes   | Direct, safeload         |
| Program RAM   | 2048 × 39    | 3072 to 4095 (0x0C00 to 0x13FF) | Yes  | Yes   | Direct                   |

## CONTROL PORT

The ADAU1787 has a 4-wire SPI control port and a 2-wire I²C bus control port. Each port can set the memories and registers. The IC defaults to I²C mode but can be put into SPI control mode by pulling the SS pin low three times. When in I²C mode, the unused control pins determine the I²C device address. The IC can be put into I²C and/or SPI mode by tying the SW_EN pin to DGND.

The control port is capable of full read/write operation for all addressable memories and registers. Most signal processing parameters are controlled by writing new values to the parameter memories using the control port. Other functions, such as mute and input/output mode control, are programmed through the registers.

All addresses can be accessed in either single address mode or burst mode. The first byte (Byte 0) of a control port write contains the 7-bit IC address plus the R/W bit. The next two bytes (Byte 1 and Byte 2) are the 16-bit subaddress of the memory or register location within the ADAU1787. All subsequent bytes (starting with Byte 3) contain the data, such as the register, program, or parameter data. The exact formats for specific types of writes are shown in Figure 61 and Figure 62.

If large blocks of data must be downloaded to the ADAU1787 DSP cores, the output of the cores can be disabled, new data can be loaded, and the core can then be restarted. This restart is typically done during the booting sequence at start-up or when loading a new program into memory. Registers and bits shown as reserved in the register map read back 0s.

The control port pins are multifunctional, depending on the mode in which the device is operating. 

### Table 28. Control Port Pin Functions

| Pin           | I²C Mode                       | SPI Mode               |
|---------------|--------------------------------|------------------------|
| SCL/SCLK      | SCL—input                      | SCLK—input             |
| SDA/MISO      | SDA—open-collector output      | MISO—output            |
| ADDR1/MOSI    | I²C Address Bit 1—input        | MOSI—input             |
| ADDR0/SS      | I²C Address Bit 0—input        | SS—input               |

### BURST MODE COMMUNICATION

Burst mode addressing, in which the subaddresses are automatically incremented at word boundaries, can be used for writing large amounts of data to contiguous memory locations. This increment happens automatically after a single-word write unless the control port communication is stopped (that is, a stop condition is issued for I²C, or SS is brought high for SPI).

The registers and RAMs in the ADAU1787 range in width from one byte to five bytes, so the auto-increment feature knows the mapping between subaddresses and the word length of the destination register (or memory location).

### Table 29. Control Pins Function Setup List

| Mode | IOVDD (V) | I²C Address    | BCLK0 Pin | SDATAO_0 Pin  | ADDR1/MOSI Pin | ADDR0/SS Pin  | SCL/SCLK Pin  | SDA/MISO Pin  | SW_EN Pin |
|------|-----------|----------------|-----------|---------------|----------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|-----------|
| I²C  | 1.2 to 1.8| 0x28           | BCLK0     | SDATAO_0      | 0              | 0             | SCL           | SDA           | 0         |
| I²C  | 1.2 to 1.8| 0x29           | BCLK0     | SDATAO_0      | 0              | 1             | SCL           | SDA           | 0         |
| I²C  | 1.2 to 1.8| 0x2A           | BCLK0     | SDATAO_0      | 1              | 0             | SCL           | SDA           | 0         |
| I²C  | 1.2 to 1.8| 0x2B           | BCLK0     | SDATAO_0      | 1              | 1             | SCL           | SDA           | 0         |
| SPI  | 1.2 to 1.8| Not applicable | BCLK0     | SDATAO_0      | MOSI           | SS            | SCLK          | MISO          | 0         |

### Table 30. I²C/SPI Control Data Word Sizes and Address Ranges

| Base Address | End Address | Description                      | Width per Address | Write Modes       | Writes Needed for Update |
|--------------|-------------|----------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|
| 0x0000       | 0x0F00      | Reserved                         | Not applicable    | Not applicable    | Not applicable           |
| 0x2000       | 0x3FFF      | SigmaDSP parameter RAM           | 8                 | Direct, safeload  | 4                        |
| 0x5000       | 0x77FF      | SigmaDSP program RAM             | 8                 | Direct            | 5                        |
| 0x7800       | 0x97FF      | SigmaDSP data RAM                | 8                 | Direct            | 4                        |
| 0xC000       | 0xC0E1      | Control registers                | 8                 | Direct            | 1                        |
| 0xD000       | 0xD0FF      | FastDSP program                  | 8                 | Direct            | 4                        |
| 0xD100       | 0xDFFF      | FastDSP parameter                | 8                 | Direct, safeload  | 4                        |
| 0xE000       | 0xE3FF      | FastDSP state                    | 8                 | Direct            | 4                        |

### READING AND WRITING TO MEMORIES

All SigmaDSP and FastDSP memory locations are larger than a single byte. While each byte occupies a single address when communicating over a control interface (I²C or SPI), when writing to these memories, an entire memory word must be written starting with the lowest address and continuing sequentially to the highest address for a write to actually occur. Similarly, a read must begin at the lowest memory address. However, for reads, all locations must not be read. The mapping of bytes over the control interface is the most significant byte, or a memory location is written or read first, and the least significant byte is written or read last. The memories can be read or written in burst mode or single byte mode so that the preceding requirements are met.

### Table 31. Example Write to SigmaDSP Program RAM Word 0

| Address | Data                |
|---------|---------------------|
| 0x5000  | Data, Bits[39:32]   |
| 0x5001  | Data, Bits[31:24]   |
| 0x5002  | Data, Bits[23:16]   |
| 0x5003  | Data, Bits[15:8]    |
| 0x5004  | Data, Bits[7:0], the memory is written to after this write |

### I²C PORT

The ADAU1787 supports a 2-wire serial (I²C-compatible) microprocessor bus driving multiple peripherals. I²C uses two pins, serial data (SDA) and serial clock (SCL), to carry data between the ADAU1787 and the system I²C master controller.

In I²C mode, the ADAU1787 is always a slave on the bus, except when the IC is self-booting. See the Self Boot section for details about using the ADAU1787 in self-boot mode. The device supports fast mode plus I²C operation, but for most bus capacitances, the SDA_MISO_DRIVE bit must be set to 1 to support these operating speeds.

Each slave device is recognized by a unique 7-bit device address. The ADAU1787 I²C address format is shown in Table 32. The LSB of this first byte sent from the I²C master sets either a read or write operation. Logic Level 1 corresponds to a read operation, and Logic Level 0 corresponds to a write operation.

Pin ADDR0 and Pin ADDR1 set the LSBs of the I²C address (see Table 33). Therefore, each ADAU1787 can be set to one of four unique addresses, allowing multiple ICs to exist on the same I²C bus without address contention. The 7-bit I²C addresses are shown in Table 33.

An I²C data transfer is always terminated by a stop condition. Both SDA and SCL must have 2.0 kΩ pull-up resistors on the lines connected to these pins. The voltage on these signal lines cannot be higher than IOVDD.

### Table 32. I²C Address Format

| Bit 6 | Bit 5 | Bit 4 | Bit 3 | Bit 2 | Bit 1 | Bit 0 |
|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| 0     | 1     | 0     | 1     | 0     | ADDR1 | ADDR0 |

### Table 33. I²C Addresses

| ADDR1 (MOSI) | ADDR0 (SS) | Slave Address |
|--------------|------------|---------------|
| 0            | 0          | 0x28          |
| 0            | 1          | 0x29          |
| 1            | 0          | 0x2A          |
| 1            | 1          | 0x2B          |

### Addressing

Initially, each device on the I²C bus is in an idle state and monitoring the SDA and SCL lines for a start condition and the proper address. The I²C master initiates a data transfer by establishing a start condition, defined by a high to low transition on SDA while SCL remains high, indicating that an address/data stream follows. All devices on the bus respond to the start condition and shift the next eight bits (the 7-bit address plus the R/W bit) MSB first. The device that recognizes the transmitted address responds by pulling the data line low during the ninth clock pulse. This ninth bit is known as an acknowledge bit. All other devices withdraw from the bus at this point and return to the idle condition. The R/W bit determines the direction of the data. A Logic 0 on the LSB of the first byte indicates that the master writes information to the peripheral, whereas a Logic 1 indicates that the master reads information from the peripheral after writing the subaddress and repeating the start address. A data transfer takes place until a stop condition is encountered. A stop condition occurs when SDA transitions from low to high while SCL is held high. 

Stop and start conditions can be detected at any stage during the data transfer. If these conditions are asserted out of sequence with normal read and write operations, the ADAU1787 immediately jumps to the idle condition. During a given SCL high period, the user can only issue one start condition, one stop condition, or a single stop condition followed by a single start condition. A no-acknowledge condition is where the SDA line is not pulled low on the ninth clock pulse on SCL. If an invalid subaddress is issued by the user, the ADAU1787 issues an acknowledge, but no data write occurs, and a read returns zeros. If the highest subaddress location is reached while in write mode, the data for the invalid byte is not loaded to any subaddress register.

### I²C Read and Write Operations

Figure 61 shows the timing of a single-word write operation. Every ninth clock pulse, the ADAU1787 issues an acknowledge by pulling SDA low. 

Figure 62 shows the timing of a burst mode write sequence. This example demonstrates a case where the target destination words are two bytes, such as the program memory. The ADAU1787 knows to increment its subaddress register every two bytes because the requested subaddress corresponds to a register or memory area with a 2-byte word length.

The timing of a single-word read operation is shown in Figure 63. Note that the first R/W bit is 0, indicating a write operation because the subaddress still must be written to set up the internal address. After the ADAU1787 acknowledges the receipt of the subaddress, the master must issue a repeated start command, followed by the chip address byte with the R/W set to 1 (read), causing the ADAU1787 SDA to reverse and begin driving data back to the master. The master then responds every ninth pulse with an acknowledge pulse to the ADAU1787.

Figure 64 shows the timing of a burst mode read sequence. This example demonstrates a case where the target read words are two bytes. The ADAU1787 increments its subaddress every two bytes because the requested subaddress corresponds to a register or memory area with word lengths of two bytes. Other address ranges may have a variety of word lengths, ranging from one byte to four bytes. The ADAU1787 always decodes the subaddress and sets the auto-increment circuit so that the address increments after the appropriate number of bytes.

Figures 61 to 64 use the following abbreviations:
- **S** is the start bit.
- **P** is the stop bit.
- **AM** is acknowledge by master.
- **AS** is acknowledge by slave.

### Figure 61. Single-Word I²C Write Format 

||
|-|
|S|
|I²C ADDRESS, R/!W=0|
|AS|
|SUBADDRES HIGH|
|AS|
|SUBADRESS LOW|
|AS|
|DATA BYTE 1|
|AS|
|DATA BYTE 2|
|AS|
|...|
|AS|
|DATA BYTE N|
|P|

### Figure 62. Burst Mode I²C Write Format

||
|-|
|S|
|I²C ADDRESS, R/!W=0|
|AS|
|SUBADDRES HIGH|
|AS|
|SUBADRESS LOW|
|AS|
|DATA-WORD 1, BYTE 1|
|AS|
|DATA-WORD 1, BYTE 2|
|AS|
|DATA-WORD 2, BYTE 1|
|AS|
|DATA-WORD 2, BYTE 2|
|AS|
|...|
|P|

### Figure 63. Single-Word I²C Read Format

||
|-|
|S|
|I²C ADDRESS, R/!W=0|
|AS|
|SUBADDRES HIGH|
|AS|
|SUBADRESS LOW|
|AS|
|S|
|I²C ADDRESS, R/!W=1|
|AS|
|DATA BYTE 1|
|AM|
|DATA BYTE 2|
|AM|
|...|
|AM|
|DATA BYTE N|
|P|

### Figure 64. Burst Mode I²C Read Format

||
|-|
|S|
|I²C ADDRESS, R/!W=0|
|AS|
|SUBADDRES HIGH|
|AS|
|SUBADRESS LOW|
|AS|
|S|
|I²C ADDRESS, R/!W=1|
|AS|
|DATA-WORD 1, BYTE 1|
|AM|
|DATA-WORD 2, BYTE 2|
|AM|
|...|
|P|